How would you describe depression to someone who's never had it?

Imagine that you get up one day, and spend that day doing one of your favorite hobbies. You get to hang out with your friends, doing things you love. There's good food and nothing bad happens that day. Heck, let's even imagine the weather is perfect. And at the end of that day, doing all the things you love around the people you like in the best possible way you feel... average. OK. Not-awful.

That's one big part of depression. It's not that you "feel sad" more often, it's that the whole range of your feelings shifts downward. A normal person feels bad sometimes, feels good sometimes, and feels OK or average most of the time. Depression shifts that whole window down, so that your best day is "OK", your worst feels awful, and most of the time, you're hurting.

And if you're like most people, your brain is this amazing pattern-matching thing with no off-switch. Normally, if you feel angry or tired, you start looking for a cause: "Oh, I forgot to eat breakfast" or "I was really hoping my boss would like my proposal, and he didn't" and then things make sense. But if you're depressed, you feel awful all the time for no clear reason at all, and over time, that alone is pretty distressing.

I've said it before: feeling fucked-up when you're in a fucked-up situation doesn't mean you're a fuck-up, it means you're a human being. If your dad has dementia and your mom can't walk anymore and you just put down your dog, you should feel awful. But when dad's got caregiver and so does mom and you have a decent job and your spouse loves you and you still feel awful all the time... that's depression. And your tireless pattern-matching brain eventually says stuff like "Hey, why don't you blow up your job/marriage/friendships, that way at least the way you're feeling right now will make sense!" Or, if things go on long enough, your brain will say "we're hurting all the time. We tried doing things we like, and we still hurt. We tried not doing things, and we still hurt. So clearly, the reason we're hurting is that we're still existing... what if we could change that?"